User Account Control Bypass:
Case Study
There are various ways to bypass UAC.
In this example, we will
demonstrate a technique
that allows an administrative
user to bypass UAC
by silently elevating the
integrity level.
Most of the publicly known
UAC bypass techniques
target a specific operating
system version.
In this case, the target is our lab client
running Windows 10 build 1709.
We will use an interesting UAC bypass
based on fodhelper.exe,
a Microsoft support application
that runs as high integrity
and is responsible for managing language
changes in the operating system.
We can leverage this to bypass UAC
because of the way fodhelper interacts
with the Windows Registry.
More specifically, it interacts
with registry keys
that can be modified without
administrative privileges.
We will find and modify these registry
keys to run a command with high integrity.
We’ll begin our analysis by
running the fodhelper.exe binary.
To gather detailed information regarding
the fodhelper integrity level
and the permissions
required to run this process,
we will inspect its application manifest.
The application manifest is an
XML file containing information
that lets the operating system know how
to handle the program when it is started.
We can inspect the manifest with the
sigcheck utility included in Sysinternals,
passing the -a argument
for extended information
and the -m argument to
dump the manifest.
A quick look at the results
shows that the application
is meant to be run by
administrative users
so it will require the full
administrator access token.
The autoelevate flag is also set to true,
which allows the executable
to auto-elevate to high integrity
without prompting the
administrator user for consent.
We will use Process Monitor
from the Sysinternals suite
to gather more information
about this tool as it executes.
After starting procmon.exe,
we’ll run fodhelper.exe again and we’ll
set filters to focus on the activities
performed by the fodhelper process.
This filter significantly reduced the
output, but for this specific vulnerability
we are only interested in
how this application
interacts with the registry keys that can
be modified by the current user.
To narrow our results, we will add another
filter with a search for “Reg”,
which Procmon uses to
mark registry operations.
Once our additional filter
has been added,
and we should only see results
for registry operations.
These are more manageable, but we want
to further reduce the output.
Specifically, we want to see if the
fodhelper application is
attempting to access registry
entries that do not exist.
If this is the case and the permissions
of these registry keys allow it,
we may be able to add those entries
and change the actions
the targeted high-integrity
process is attempting to perform.
This time, we will add a “Result”
filter for “NAME NOT FOUND”,
an error message that indicates
that the application
is attempting to access a registry
entry that does not exist.
The output reveals that
fodhelper.exe does, in fact,
generate the “NAME NOT FOUND” error,
an indicator of a potentially
exploitable registry entry.
However, since we can’t just modify
registry entries in every hive,
we need to focus on the
registry hive we can control.
In this case, we will focus on the
HKEY_CURRENT_USER (HKCU) hive
which the current user
has the ability to modify.
This is rather interesting.
fodhelper.exe attempts to query a registry
key that does not appear to exist.
To understand why this is
happening and what exactly
this registry key is used for, we’ll
modify our Path filter
and look for any access
to entries that contain
ms-settings\shell\open\command.
If the process can successfully
access that key in some other hive,
the results will provide
us with more clues,
so we will also remove
our result filter.
This is an interesting result.
When fodhelper does not
find the registry key in HKCU,
it immediately tries to
access the same key
in the HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT hive and it is
successfull since that key exists.
If we search for this key in the registry,
we find a valid entry.
Based on this observation, and after
searching the MSDN documentation,
we can infer that fodhelper
is opening a section
of the Windows Settings application
through the ms-settings:
application protocol.
An application protocol on Windows
defines the executable to launch
when a particular URL is
used by a program.
These URL-Application mappings can be
defined through Registry entries
similar to the ms-setting
key we found in HKCR.
In this case, the application protocol
schema for ms-settings
passes the execution to a COM
object instead of to a program.
This can be done by setting the
DelegateExecute key
value to a specific COM class ID.
This is definitely interesting
because fodhelper tries to access
the ms-setting registry key
within the HKCU hive first.
Previous results from Process Monitor
clearly showed that this
key does not exist in HKCU,
but we should have the
permissions to create it.
This could allow us to
hijack the execution
using a properly formatted
protocol handler.
Let’s try to add this key
with the REG utility.
Once we have added
the registry key,
We will add our result filter again,
clear all the results from
Process Monitor,
restart fodhelper.exe,
and monitor the process activity.
This time, fodhelper.exe
attempts to query a value
called DelegateExecute stored in
our newly-created command key.
This did not happen before we created our
fake application protocol key.
However, since we do not want to hijack
the execution through a COM object,
we’ll add an empty DelegateExecute entry.
The plan is that when fodhelper
discovers this empty value,
it will look for a program to launch
specified in the
Shell\Open\command\Default key entry.
We will use REG ADD,
with the /v argument to
specify the value name,
and /t to specify the type.
In order to verify that fodhelper
successfully accesses
the DelegateExecute entry
we have just added,
we will remove the
“NAME NOT FOUND” filter,
replace it with “SUCCESS” to show
only successful operations,
and restart the process again.
As expected, fodhelper finds the
new DelegateExecute entry we added,
but since its value is empty,
it also looks for the
(Default) entry value
of the Shell\open\command
registry key.
The (Default) entry value is automatically
set to null when adding any registry key.
We will replace the empty (Default) value
with an executable of our choice, cmd.exe.
This should force fodhelper to
handle the ms-settings: protocol
with our own executable!
To test this theory, we’ll specify the
new registry value with /d “cmd.exe”,
and use /f to add the value silently.
After setting the value and running
fodhelper.exe once again,
we are presented with a command shell.
The output of the
whoami /groups command
shows that this is a
high-integrity command shell.
Let’s attempt to change
the admin password,
Excellent. The password
change is successful
and we have successfully bypassed UAC!
This attack not only demonstrates
a terrific UAC bypass,
but also reveals a process that we
could use to discover similar bypasses.